At Candlemas you called this poetry One of the fragile, mighty things of God, That die at an insult. Give me some true answer, For on that day we spoke about the Court, And said that all that was insulted there The world insulted, for the Courtly life, Being the first comely child of the world, Is the world’s model. How shall I answer him? Can you not give me some true argument? I will not tempt him with a lying one. O, tell him that the lovers of his music Have need of him. But I am labouring For some that shall be born in the nick o’ time, And find sweet nurture, that they may have voices, [17]Even in anger, like the strings of harps; And how could they be born to majesty If I had never made the golden cradle? Why did you take me from my father’s fields? If you would leave me now, what shall I love? Where shall I go? What shall I set my hand to? And why have you put music in my ears, If you would send me to the clattering houses? I will throw down the trumpet and the harp, For how could I sing verses or make music With none to praise me, and a broken heart? What was it that the poets promised you, If it was not their sorrow? Do not speak. Have I not opened school on these bare steps, And are not you the youngest of my scholars? And I would have all know that when all falls In ruin, poetry calls out in joy, Being the scattering hand, the bursting pod, The victim’s joy among the holy flame, God’s laughter at the shattering of the world. And now that joy laughs out, and weeps and burns On these bare steps.[18] O master, do not die! Trouble him with no useless argument. Be silent! There is nothing we can do Except find out the King and kneel to him, And beg our ancient right. For here are some To say whatever we could say and more, And fare as badly. Come, boy, that is no use. If it seem well that we beseech the King, Lay down your harps and trumpets on the stones In silence, and come with me silently. Come with slow footfalls, and bow all your heads, For a bowed head becomes a mourner best. ‘Chief Poet,’ ‘Ireland,’ ‘Townsman,’ ‘Grazing land,’ Those are the words I have to keep in mind— ‘Chief Poet,’ ‘Ireland,’ ‘Townsman,’ ‘Grazing land.’ I have the words. They are all upon the Ogham. ‘Chief Poet,’ ‘Ireland,’ ‘Townsman,’ ‘Grazing land.’ But what’s their order? The King were rightly served If Seanchan drove his good luck away. What’s there about a king, that’s in the world From birth to burial like another man, That he should change old customs, that were in it As long as ever the world has been a world?[20] If I were king I would not meddle with him, For there is something queer about a poet. I knew of one that would be making rhyme Under a thorn at crossing of three roads. He was as ragged as ourselves, and yet He was no sooner dead than every thorn tree From Inchy to Kiltartan withered away. The King is but a fool! I am getting ready. A poet has power from beyond the world, That he may set our thoughts upon old times, And lucky queens and little holy fish That rise up every seventh year—— Hush! hush! To cure the crippled.[21] I am half ready now. There’s not a mischief I’d begrudge the King If it were any other—— Hush! I am ready. That died to get it. I have brought out the food, And if my master will not eat of it, I’ll home and get provision for his wake, For that’s no great way off. Well, have your say, But don’t be long about it. Chief Poet of Ireland, I am the Mayor of your own town Kinvara, And I am come to tell you that the news Of this great trouble with the King of Gort [22]Has plunged us in deep sorrow—part for you, Our honoured townsman, part for our good town. But what comes now? Something about the King. Get on! get on! The food is all set out. Don’t hurry me. Give us a taste of it. He’ll not begrudge it. Let them that have their limbs Starve if they will. We have to keep in mind The stomach God has left us. Hush! I have it! The King was said to be most friendly to us, [23]And we have reason, as you’ll recollect, For thinking that he was about to give Those grazing lands inland we so much need, Being pinched between the water and the stones. Our mowers mow with knives between the stones; The sea washes the meadows. You know well We have asked nothing but what’s reasonable. Reason in plenty. Yellowy white hair, A hollow face, and not too many teeth. How comes it he has been so long in the world And not found Reason out? What good is there In telling him what he has heard all day! I will set food before him. [24]Don’t hurry me! It’s small respect you’re showing to the town! Get farther off! [To SEANCHAN.] We would not have you think, Weighty as these considerations are, That they have been as weighty in our minds As our desire that one we take much pride in, A man that’s been an honour to our town, Should live and prosper; therefore we beseech you To give way in a matter of no moment, A matter of mere sentiment—a trifle— That we may always keep our pride in you. Master, master, eat this! It’s not king’s food, That’s cooked for everybody and nobody. Here’s barley-bread out of your father’s oven, And dulse from Duras. Here is the dulse, your honour; It’s wholesome, and has the good taste of the sea. He has taken it, and there’ll be nothing left! Nothing at all; he wanted his own sort. What’s honey to a cat, corn to a dog, Or a green apple to a ghost in a churchyard? Eat it yourself, for you have come a journey, And it may be eat nothing on the way. How could I eat it, and your honour starving! It is your father sends it, and he cried Because the stiffness that is in his bones Prevented him from coming, and bid me tell you That he is old, that he has need of you, And that the people will be pointing at him, And he not able to lift up his head, If you should turn the King’s favour away; And he adds to it, that he cared you well, And you in your young age, and that it’s right That you should care him now.[26] And is that all? What did my mother say? She gave no message; For when they told her you had it in mind to starve, Or get again the ancient right of the poets, She said: ‘No message can do any good. He will not send the answer that you want. We cannot change him.’ And she went indoors, Lay down upon the bed, and turned her face Out of the light. And thereupon your father Said: ‘Tell him that his mother sends no message, Albeit broken down and miserable.’      [A pause. Here’s a pigeon’s egg from Duras, and these others Were laid by your own hens. She has sent no message. [27]Our mothers know us; they know us to the bone. They knew us before birth, and that is why They know us even better than the sweethearts Upon whose breasts we have lain. Go quickly! Go And tell them that my mother was in the right. There is no answer. Go and tell them that. Go tell them that she knew me. What is he saying? I never understood a poet’s talk More than the baa of a sheep! You have not heard, It may be, having been so much away, How many of the cattle died last winter From lacking grass, and that there was much sickness Because the poor have nothing but salt fish To live on through the winter? Get away, And leave the place to me! It’s my turn now, For your sack’s empty![28] Is it ‘get away’! Is that the way I’m to be spoken to! Am I not Mayor? Amn’t I authority? Amn’t I in the King’s place? Answer me that! Then show the people what a king is like: Pull down old merings and root custom up, Whitewash the dunghills, fatten hogs and geese, Hang your gold chain about an ass’s neck, And burn the blessed thorn trees out of the fields, And drive what’s comely away! Holy Saint Coleman! Fine talk! fine talk! What else does the King do? He fattens hogs and drives the poet away! He starves the song-maker![29]