Because I have killed men without your bidding And have rewarded others at my own pleasure, Because of half a score of trifling things You’d lay this oath upon me, and now—and now You add another pebble to the heap. And I must be your man, well-nigh your bondsman, Because a youngster out of Aoife’s country Has found the shore ill-guarded. He came to land While you were somewhere out of sight and hearing, Hunting or dancing with your wild companions. [86]He can be driven out. I’ll not be bound. I’ll dance or hunt, or quarrel or make love, Wherever and whenever I’ve a mind to. If time had not put water in your blood, You never would have thought it. I would leave A strong and settled country to my children. And I must be obedient in all things; Give up my will to yours; go where you please; Come when you call; sit at the council-board Among the unshapely bodies of old men. I whose mere name has kept this country safe, I that in early days have driven out Maeve of Cruachan and the northern pirates, The hundred kings of Sorcha, and the kings Out of the Garden in the East of the World. Must I, that held you on the throne when all Had pulled you from it, swear obedience As if I were some cattle-raising king? Are my shins speckled with the heat of the fire, Or have my hands no skill but to make figures Upon the ashes with a stick? Am I So slack and idle that I need a whip Before I serve you?[87] No, no whip, Cuchulain, But every day my children come and say: ‘This man is growing harder to endure. How can we be at safety with this man That nobody can buy or bid or bind? We shall be at his mercy when you are gone; He burns the earth as if he were a fire, And time can never touch him.’ And so the tale Grows finer yet; and I am to obey Whatever child you set upon the throne, As if it were yourself! Most certainly. I am High King, my son shall be High King; And you for all the wildness of your blood, And though your father came out of the sun, Are but a little king and weigh but light In anything that touches government, If put into the balance with my children. [88]It’s well that we should speak our minds out plainly, For when we die we shall be spoken of In many countries. We in our young days Have seen the heavens like a burning cloud Brooding upon the world, and being more Than men can be now that cloud’s lifted up, We should be the more truthful. Conchubar, I do not like your children—they have no pith, No marrow in their bones, and will lie soft Where you and I lie hard. You rail at them Because you have no children of your own. I think myself most lucky that I leave No pallid ghost or mockery of a man To drift and mutter in the corridors, Where I have laughed and sung. That is not true, For all your boasting of the truth between us; For, there is no man having house and lands, That have been in the one family And called by the one name for centuries, But is made miserable if he know They are to pass into a stranger’s keeping, As yours will pass.[89] The most of men feel that, But you and I leave names upon the harp. You play with arguments as lawyers do, And put no heart in them. I know your thoughts, For we have slept under the one cloak and drunk From the one wine cup. I know you to the bone. I have heard you cry, aye in your very sleep, ‘I have no son,’ and with such bitterness That I have gone upon my knees and prayed That it might be amended. For you thought That I should be as biddable as others Had I their reason for it; but that’s not true, For I would need a weightier argument Than one that marred me in the copying, As I have that clean hawk out of the air That, as men say, begot this body of mine Upon a mortal woman. Now as ever You mock at every reasonable hope, And would have nothing, or impossible things. What eye has ever looked upon the child Would satisfy a mind like that?[90] I would leave My house and name to none that would not face Even myself in battle. Being swift of foot, And making light of every common chance, You should have overtaken on the hills Some daughter of the air, or on the shore A daughter of the Country-under-Wave. I am not blasphemous. Yet you despise Our queens, and would not call a child your own, If one of them had borne him. I have not said it. Ah! I remember I have heard you boast, [91]When the ale was in your blood, that there was one In Scotland, where you had learnt the trade of war, That had a stone-pale cheek and red-brown hair. And that although you had loved other women, You’d sooner that fierce woman of the camp Bore you a son than any queen among them. You call her a ‘fierce woman of the camp,’ For having lived among the spinning-wheels, You’d have no woman near that would not say, ‘Ah! how wise!’ ‘What will you have for supper?’ ‘What shall I wear that I may please you, sir?’ And keep that humming through the day and night Forever. A fierce woman of the camp! But I am getting angry about nothing. You have never seen her. Ah! Conchubar, had you seen her With that high, laughing, turbulent head of hers Thrown backward, and the bow-string at her ear, Or sitting at the fire with those grave eyes Full of good counsel as it were with wine, Or when love ran through all the lineaments [92]Of her wild body—although she had no child, None other had all beauty, queen, or lover, Or was so fitted to give birth to kings. There’s nothing I can say but drifts you farther From the one weighty matter. That very woman— For I know well that you are praising Aoife— Now hates you and will leave no subtilty Unknotted that might run into a noose About your throat, no army in idleness That might bring ruin on this land you serve. No wonder in that, no wonder at all in that. I never have known love but as a kiss In the mid-battle, and a difficult truce Of oil and water, candles and dark night, Hillside and hollow, the hot-footed sun, And the cold, sliding, slippery-footed moon— A brief forgiveness between opposites That have been hatreds for three times the age Of this long-’stablished ground. Listen to me. [93]Aoife makes war on us, and every day Our enemies grow greater and beat the walls More bitterly, and you within the walls Are every day more turbulent; and yet, When I would speak about these things, your fancy Runs as it were a swallow on the wind.