I am of Aoife’s army. Put up your swords. He is but one. Aoife is far away.[100] I have come alone into the midst of you To weigh this sword against Cuchulain’s sword. And are you noble? for if of common seed, You cannot weigh your sword against his sword But in mixed battle. I am under bonds To tell my name to no man; but it’s noble. But I would know your name and not your bonds. You cannot speak in the Assembly House, If you are not noble. Answer the High King! I will give no other proof than the hawk gives— That it’s no sparrow! Yet look upon me, kings. I, too, am of that ancient seed, and carry The signs about this body and in these bones.[101] To have shown the hawk’s grey feather is enough, And you speak highly, too. Give me that helmet. I’d thought they had grown weary sending champions. That sword and belt will do. This fighting’s welcome. The High King there has promised me his wisdom; But the hawk’s sleepy till its well-beloved Cries out amid the acorns, or it has seen Its enemy like a speck upon the sun. What’s wisdom to the hawk, when that clear eye Is burning nearer up in the high air? Hither into the light. The very tint Of her that I was speaking of but now. Not a pin’s difference. You are from the North Where there are many that have that tint of hair— [102]Red-brown, the light red-brown. Come nearer, boy, For I would have another look at you. There’s more likeness—a pale, a stone-pale cheek. What brought you, boy? Have you no fear of death? Whether I live or die is in the gods’ hands. That is all words, all words; a young man’s talk. I am their plough, their harrow, their very strength; For he that’s in the sun begot this body Upon a mortal woman, and I have heard tell It seemed as if he had outrun the moon; That he must follow always through waste heaven, He loved so happily. He’ll be but slow To break a tree that was so sweetly planted. Let’s see that arm. I’ll see it if I choose. That arm had a good father and a good mother, But it is not like this. You are mocking me; You think I am not worthy to be fought. But I’ll not wrangle but with this talkative knife.[103] Put up your sword; I am not mocking you. I’d have you for my friend, but if it’s not Because you have a hot heart and a cold eye, I cannot tell the reason. [To CONCHUBAR.] He has got her fierceness, And nobody is as fierce as those pale women. But I will keep him with me, Conchubar, That he may set my memory upon her When the day’s fading.—You will stop with us, And we will hunt the deer and the wild bulls; And, when we have grown weary, light our fires Between the wood and water, or on some mountain Where the shape-changers of the morning come. The High King there would make a mock of me Because I did not take a wife among them. Why do you hang your head? It’s a good life: The head grows prouder in the light of the dawn, And friendship thickens in the murmuring dark Where the spare hazels meet the wool-white foam. But I can see there’s no more need for words And that you’ll be my friend from this day out.[104] He has come hither not in his own name But in Queen Aoife’s, and has challenged us In challenging the foremost man of us all. Well, well, what matter? You think it does not matter; And that a fancy lighter than the air, A whim of the moment has more matter in it. For having none that shall reign after you, You cannot think as I do, who would leave A throne too high for insult. Let your children Re-mortar their inheritance, as we have, And put more muscle on.—I’ll give you gifts, But I’d have something too—that arm-ring, boy. We’ll have this quarrel out when you are older. There is no man I’d sooner have my friend [105]Than you, whose name has gone about the world As if it had been the wind; but Aoife’d say I had turned coward. I will give you gifts That Aoife’ll know, and all her people know, To have come from me.       [Showing cloak. My father gave me this. He came to try me, rising up at dawn Out of the cold dark of the rich sea. He challenged me to battle, but before My sword had touched his sword, told me his name, Gave me this cloak, and vanished. It was woven By women of the Country-under-Wave Out of the fleeces of the sea. O! tell her I was afraid, or tell her what you will. No; tell her that I heard a raven croak On the north side of the house, and was afraid. Some witch of the air has troubled Cuchulain’s mind. No witchcraft. His head is like a woman’s head I had a fancy for.[106] A witch of the air Can make a leaf confound us with memories. They run upon the wind and hurl the spells That make us nothing, out of the invisible wind. They have gone to school to learn the trick of it. No, no—there’s nothing out of common here; The winds are innocent.—That arm-ring, boy. If I’ve your leave I’ll take this challenge up. No, give it me, High King, for this wild Aoife Has carried off my slaves. No, give it me, For she has harried me in house and herd. I claim this fight. And I! And I! And I![107] Back! back! Put up your swords! Put up your swords! There’s none alive that shall accept a challenge I have refused. Laegaire, put up your sword! No, let them come. If they’ve a mind for it, I’ll try it out with any two together. That’s spoken as I’d have spoken it at your age. But you are in my house. Whatever man Would fight with you shall fight it out with me. They’re dumb, they’re dumb. How many of you would meet           [Draws sword. This mutterer, this old whistler, this sandpiper, This edge that’s greyer than the tide, this mouse That’s gnawing at the timbers of the world, This, this—— Boy, I would meet them all in arms If I’d a son like you. He would avenge me When I have withstood for the last time the men [108]Whose fathers, brothers, sons, and friends I have killed Upholding Conchubar, when the four provinces Have gathered with the ravens over them. But I’d need no avenger. You and I Would scatter them like water from a dish. We’ll stand by one another from this out. Here is the ring. No, turn and turn about. But my turn’s first because I am the older. Nine queens out of the Country-under-Wave Have woven it with the fleeces of the sea And they were long embroidering at it.—Boy, If I had fought my father, he’d have killed me. As certainly as if I had a son And fought with him, I should be deadly to him; For the old fiery fountains are far off And every day there is less heat o’ the blood. No more of this. I will not have this friendship. Cuchulain is my man, and I forbid it. He shall not go unfought, for I myself—[109] I will not have it. You lay commands on me? You shall not stir, High King. I’ll hold you there. Witchcraft has maddened you. Yes, witchcraft! witchcraft! Some witch has worked upon your mind, Cuchulain. The head of that young man seemed like a woman’s You’d had a fancy for. Then of a sudden You laid your hands on the High King himself! And laid my hands on the High King himself?[110] Some witch is floating in the air above us. Yes, witchcraft, witchcraft! Witches of the air!          [To YOUNG MAN. Why did you? Who was it set you to this work? Out, out! I say, for now it’s sword on sword! But . . . but I did not. Out, I say, out, out!