Has he not led us into these waste seas For long enough?[186] Aye, long and long enough. We have not come upon a shore or ship These dozen weeks. And I had thought to make A good round sum upon this cruise, and turn— For I am getting on in life—to something That has less ups and downs than robbery. I am so lecherous with abstinence I’d give the profit of nine voyages For that red Moll that had but the one eye. And all the ale ran out at the new moon; And now that time puts water in my blood, The ale cup is my father and my mother. It would be better to turn home again, Whether he will or no; and better still To make an end while he is sleeping there. If we were of one mind I’d do it.[187] Were’t not That there is magic in that harp of his, That makes me fear to raise a hand against him, I would be of your mind; but when he plays it Strange creatures flutter up before one’s eyes, Or cry about one’s ears. Nothing to fear. Do you remember when we sank that galley At the full moon? He played all through the night. Until the moon had set; and when I looked Where the dead drifted, I could see a bird Like a grey gull upon the breast of each. While I was looking they rose hurriedly, And after circling with strange cries awhile Flew westward; and many a time since then I’ve heard a rustling overhead in the wind.[188] I saw them on that night as well as you. But when I had eaten and drunk a bellyful My courage came again. But that’s not all. The other night, while he was playing it, A beautiful young man and girl came up In a white, breaking wave; they had the look Of those that are alive for ever and ever. I saw them, too, one night. Forgael was playing, And they were listening there beyond the sail. He could not see them, but I held out my hands To grasp the woman. You have dared to touch her? O, she was but a shadow, and slipped from me. But were you not afraid? Why should I fear?[189] ’Twas Aengus and Edain, the wandering lovers, To whom all lovers pray. But what of that? A shadow does not carry sword or spear. My mother told me that there is not one Of the ever-living half so dangerous As that wild Aengus. Long before her day He carried Edain off from a king’s house, And hid her among fruits of jewel-stone And in a tower of glass, and from that day Has hated every man that’s not in love, And has been dangerous to him. I have heard He does not hate seafarers as he hates Peaceable men that shut the wind away, And keep to the one weary marriage-bed. I think that he has Forgael in his net, And drags him through the sea.[190] Well, net or none, I’d kill him while we have the chance to do it. It’s certain I’d sleep easier o’ nights If he were dead; but who will be our captain, Judge of the stars, and find a course for us? I’ve thought of that. We must have Aibric with us, For he can judge the stars as well as Forgael.