Look at the door and what men gather there— Old counsellors that steer the land with me, And younger kings, the dancers and harp-players That follow in your tumults, and all these Are held there by the one anxiety. Will you be bound into obedience And so make this land safe for them and theirs? You are but half a king and I but half; I need your might of hand and burning heart, And you my wisdom. Nestlings of a high nest, [94]Hawks that have followed me into the air And looked upon the sun, we’ll out of this And sail upon the wind once more. This king Would have me take an oath to do his will, And having listened to his tune from morning, I will no more of it. Run to the stable And set the horses to the chariot-pole, And send a messenger to the harp-players. We’ll find a level place among the woods, And dance awhile. Cuchulain, take the oath. There is none here that would not have you take it. You’d have me take it? Are you of one mind? All, all, all, all! Do what the High King bids you. There is not one but dreads this turbulence Now that they’re settled men.[95] Are you so changed, Or have I grown more dangerous of late? But that’s not it. I understand it all. It’s you that have changed. You’ve wives and children now, And for that reason cannot follow one That lives like a bird’s flight from tree to tree.— It’s time the years put water in my blood And drowned the wildness of it, for all’s changed, But that unchanged.—I’ll take what oath you will: The moon, the sun, the water, light, or air, I do not care how binding. On this fire That has been lighted from your hearth and mine; The older men shall be my witnesses, The younger, yours. The holders of the fire Shall purify the thresholds of the house With waving fire, and shut the outer door, According to the custom; and sing rhyme That has come down from the old law-makers To blow the witches out. Considering That the wild will of man could be oath-bound, [96]But that a woman’s could not, they bid us sing Against the will of woman at its wildest In the shape-changers that run upon the wind.